














3BA7
Progress Report
25th april 05

Philip Mcguiness
Ross Lynch
Conall O'Brien
Michael Pierce




























What has been done:

As of Monday the 25th of April the group has the following completed. 

Web Server set up-
The project-working directory can be accessed at http://3ba7.maths.tcd.ie or over SSL at https://3ba7.maths.tcd.ie/.http://3ba7-8.maths.tcd.ie and https://3ba7-8.maths.tcd.ie/ also work as non SSL and SSL versions accordingly.
		        
Website Progress-
Main progress thus far has been the login page, which now has the following operational features.
- log in script 
              		- user validation
                		- locking out unauthorised users / failed logins after 3 failed
                  		  attempts 
               		- admin system to re-enable disabled accounts 
        			- register users
          			- validate user e-mail address
              	 	- add account to database

Testing:
A full testing plan for the QA/testing Plan stage has been set up for week seventeen. The testing plan includes all identifiable versions of web browsers across three different platforms Windows, Mac Os and Unix based systems i.e. Linux


Problems encountered:
Website: 
The issue of security for the website became and issue. Michael found it difficult to implement the initial security of the web page for user login, validation etc. however he overcame this and the features listed above have been implemented and are operational.

Group:
Group meetings became a bit of a stumbling block. As we have split our group into documenters and programmers it was crucial for each side of the group were on the same wavelength. A number of group meetings were called in the first couple of weeks of the project in which either not all members attended or the meetings being cancelled, which eventually ended with a late submission of the Requirement specifications document. However this has been rectified and all members are now attending all meetings.
Members being sick also contributed to late submission of Requirement specifications document. This however will not happen again as we have agreed to get all documentation finished in advance of deadlines were possible from now on.


Positive Issues:
Our mailing list cs-3ba7-8@maths.tcd.ie has worked out well. This has been our main communication tool and with the failure of many of our face-to-face meetings it has helped the group continue on moving forward. We have also separate shell accounts on 3ba7.maths.tcd.ie in which we are using Subversion repository to store all our work. This has worked out really well as everyone can do their work update the repository and everyone else can get access to it. To complement this we are using view cvs, so all group member can access the files via and Internet browser instead of using the unix command line. 


Progress in relation to initial Documentation:

Documentation:
The documentation has already run over once due to lack of face-to-face meetings and members being sick however to date we do have all documentation handed in. We also have a testing plan written up ahead of schedule.

Set-up:
The set up stage of the project has been completed on time with the Web server, Repository and https all being set-up in the initial stages of week 15.

Development:
The development stage of the project is running slightly over our original time frame. The main part of the development, which was the authentication of users, has been completed on time. However we original foresaw the general project to be finished by the end of week 16. But will now be completed in the early stages of week 17.

Testing:
The testing will hopefully take place on schedule with the development finishing up in the early stages of week 17 when the testing stage is to begin.










