Information Technology and the War on Iraq

Abstract: This essay addresses the effect of information technology on the war in iraq, specifically the effect it has had on the media. Why and how the media is relevant, the changes in the media between this war and previous wars, and the effects the differences in the media both have had and could have in the future will be examined.

Why and how the media is relevant
Most of the worlds superpowers are currently democracys, as such the powerholders in these countries fundamentally rely on their peoples approval of their actions as justification. Mass media has permeated the consciousness of people around the world to such an extent that to carry out something on the scale for an extended period it is essential to have a favourable image portrayed both on the tv networks and in traditional print news. Before the mid twentieth century the public in a country relied mostly on what information was passed back through the governments own sources (assuming they were not part of the theatre of war of course), who were quite obviously biased in favour of the war. What few non-government reports returned were written reports, which could of course by necessity only influence the subset of the population who read the newspapers, a small subset, newspapers certainly lacked the pervasive influence of todays TV based reporting and only gained any specifics or immediate relevance with the invention of the telegraph.

The advent of TV war reporting ensured that war reporting had an immensely visceral impact on viewers, casualities were no longer statistics but real people whose corpses could be seen strewn across the screen every day the war lasted. While wars before vietnam were fought at a distance to the public, wars since have been fought "in the living room .... quote". Every day that vietnam was prolonged subjected the viewers of a nation to a litany of horrors. Since vietnam governments have recognised the immense importance of a positive public image of a war and have spent large amounts to ensure the media portrays a favourable image of the war. The american government spent XXXX million on a center to distribute selected information to the media alone in iraq, quite apart from the amount it spends on producing footage to disseminate to the media in america.

While immediately relevant written news reports didnt have the impact that the introduction of visual reporting did, it did have some positive reprecussions and was a vast improvement over the previous method, it was rather pointless to send a report back to a newspaper that would be 3 months out of date by the time it arrived. Florence Nightingale decided to help the wounded after reading a news report in the era of more rapid reporting. Information Technology enabled both revolutions; the telegraph in the earlier case the TV in the more recent case. Today information technology is enabling another revolution in the methods and impact of news reporting. 

The changes in war coverage in the last ten years
One of the most pervasive impacts of information technology in the last ten years has been the internet. Both newspapers and tv are in essence both restricted in the variety of opinions they can voice and are inherently one way. The internet removes both restrictions, allowing just about anyone with an opinion to both advance their views and discuss them with others. There are huge barriers of entry to tv and newspaper reporting while on the internet these barriers simply dont exist.

There are three main forms of news dissemination on the internet. First are the the static sites. These most resemble the traditional print media, and newspapers can translate directly into static websites, indeed many print journalists believe that their newspapers will become wholly online media in the next 15 years [backup]. The difference between static websites on the internet and newspapers is however that there are little or no barriers to entry on the internet which allows websites to cover a spectrum of opinions that traditional news media cant.

The second form of news dissemination on the internet are web forums. Web forums allow short comments to be posted on a particular thread of conversation. The simplest web forum is simply a page ordered by response time with the seperate messages clearly demarked(chk). However more advanced and far more useful methods of viewing the messages have evolved. One such system [lnk /.] threads messages within a particular conversation/topic according to reply, i.e. all replies to a message will be listed directly under that message, all replies to replies to a message will be listed directly under the reply that they reply to and so on in a tree structure. The messages are then rated on a scale by moderators. The viewer sets the limit to a certain setting on the scale so they only view messages over this limit. As replies are generally short and in response to a news story they tend to contain factual information. This system of moderation creates an effective information sieve which makes it an effective factual resource on the original news story as all pertinent(chk) information can be easily seen.

The third form is web logging or blogging. There are free sites which exist solely to allow you to easily publish your thoughts and others to reply to them (usually in a semi-regular fashion). This has become a rather popular phenomenon [insert usage statistics]. It has become an intermediary between the static nature of a normal webpage and the extremely transient(chk) nature of a forum. The fact that blogs are owned by a single person encourage a personal journal of thoughts and news format that helps the reader identify with the author. A powerful advantage in war reporting.


Current effects of internet news dissemination and possible future effects
Already internet news sources have their niche. In the aftermath of september 11th in the US the speed of the internet news sources gave them the advantage over print media and the fact that hundreds of people in the area contributed factual reports gave them an informative advantage over televised reporting. 

In the current political climate in the US where any negative coverage of the war can lead to accusations of anti-patriotism many major news sources are presenting a wholly positive viewpoint of the war, there have even been cases of airbrushing pictures to produce a more palatable presentation. A sharp contrast with the gritty 'realism of war' reporting of vietnam.   

In the war on iraq static internet news sources have provided americans with an arab viewpoint, the arab al-jaheerza(chk) has provided a rather contrasting viewpoint to the pro-US coverage. There have been clear cases where american networks completely ignored stories that al-jaheerza covered (evidence), coverage of american casualties being a particularly obvious omission from most US news sources.

Web forums have functioned as clear indicator of public opinion (specifically american) during the war, having the advantage of not being filtered through a particular news organisation (although obviously having the disadvantage of being biased by the demographics that use the internet). Iraq lacks the internet penetration to give an accurate, instructive and informative alternate portrayal of public opinion of the sort that chinese web forums do.

Blogs by both americans and iraqis have had an effect that it would be hard if not impossible for traditional media to replicate. American blogs by interlinking have created a cohesive representation of the anti-war movement and an organisational focus for the movement of the sort that isolated print articles would find impossible to cultivate. The communication abilities of the internet allow anti-war groups to organise themselves to provide some semblance of coherent resistance to the well organised governments and corporations.

Iraqi blogs have provided a very personal connection to the horrors of war that televised coverage has failed to provide. The intentionally personal log format of blogs gives both the descriptions of suffering more emotional impact and simultaneously imparts more credibility(chk) in comparison to the (extremely) suspect iraqi governmental press releases. 

Conclusion
Information technology has enabled novel news formats to emerge on the internet.These news formats have had a tangible influence on the war by influencing public opinion. The three main formats on the internet, static pages, web forums and blogs have provided coverage either in form or content which traditional news sources couldnt or wouldnt. Static pages have provided alternative viewpoints. Web forums an accurate indicator of public opinion. Blogs both a coherent representation for the anti-war movement and personal accounts of the war from an iraqi viewpoint.

The influence of these news formats can only increase in future as more people who view these as their main sources of news emerge and the internet penetration increases around the world. 
