Abstract: This essay is a brief examination and analysis of the ways in which IT can be used to both restrict and reinforce civil liberties. An extrapolation will be presented of the possible future interactions of techniques from both areas based on the current political climate.

Restrictions on Civil Liberties
There are two pricipal means by which civil liberties can be restricted with IT. Firstly information access can be restricted to a certain acceptable subset and secondly monitoring can be carried out to ensure adherence to governmental rules (thus restricting free speech) and as part of standard information gathering for national security reasons.

The reasons used to justify the first set of restrictions is generally based on sustaining a system of government which would be vulnerable to the free flow of information, or at the very least fears it is vulnerable. The second set of restrictions are justified as measures to protect the public from threats such as terrorism, organised crime and other groups which may try to use the informational infrastructure of a country against it.

The methods employed to achieve restrictions on data access are relatively primitive. They rely on ensuring all data travelling into a particular subnet passes through a very limited number of points where human created blacklists of objectionable sites can be compared to data requested. Requests for banned data are redirected.  The largest implementation of such a system is the great firewall of china, which recently banned google as an objectionable distributor of democracy propaganda, impressive considering most of googles actual content consists of a <16 character welcome message> on the front page. 

The benefits of large scale adoption and investment has moved most communication to digital networks. Digital networks provide inherent advantages for information gathering. Digital communication is easy to instaneously copy, backup and analyse without the huge amounts of paper, time and human intervention that was necessary previously. The same technology that enables the paperless office has enabled the amount of data it is possible to intercept to increase exponentionally since the second world war. 

As the largest data network in existence the internet has evolved into a centralised data stream for tapping purposes. While at first glance it would seem restricted to purely digital computer viewed and created data the same economies of scale that have made digital communication itself more popular have made the internet a popular carrier for all kinds of data that otherwise would have had to use specialised networks. Phone companies have taken advantage of the relatively low bandwidth costs of the internet by converting their phone calls to digital format as soon as possible and transporting the data over the internet backbones to call distribution centers nearer the call destinations rather than use their own long distance lines. The convergence of communications upon the common standards of the internet has made surveillance an order of magnitude easier.

An example of an application of internet monitoring is the US Carnivore program. This program monitors email distributed through the US internet backbones (ie most of it) for suspicious content. The comparisons between letters (chosen as the previous method of communication most analogous to email) and the current methods for ease of interception is instructive. While letters had at the very least a modicum of security and anonymity in the form of envelope seals and no more locational identification than regional postcodes; email is both passed through the net as plaintext - easily readable to all systems through which they pass, and can be traced back to the sender, if not directly through the return address, then indirectly by following the path of forwarding servers and accessing the logs. 

There are also obvious disadvantages however to the huge amounts of data available to information gathering agncies - analysing such amounts of data by humans becomes nigh impossible. IT must therefore be employed at this stage as well so as to reduce the dataset to the relevant with as little false positives as possible. It is unsurprising then that the CIA is a large investor in data-mining software companies. Data-mining software consists of sets of artificial intelligence routines which comb through large databases looking for connections and highlighting them for further analysis. This brings with it all the questions associated with relying on computers for analysis skills , especially in an area where the stakes are so high.

Reinforcements of Civil Liberties by Information Technology
The internet has become a focal point for digital data and communications, creating an immense data stream from which organisations can feed. However the reason the internet evolved into the largest network is that it is by design a distributed system. There is no central point through which all data passes and can be monitored. 
Another problem with trying to ensure easy data-monitoring is the openness of the technologies underlying the internet. All major communication standards are developed by a process of discussion and the standards and many reference implementations are available on the internet itself. Any attempt at including backdoors into the standards would be immediately noticeable and doomed to failure.

As all standards and specifications are available on the net it is just as easy for people who want to protect information to use the design of network protocols in creative ways as it is to capture the data flowing through the network. In the case of the great firewall of china tools have been developed to bypass the monitoring system to allow free access with the outside net. <argument for failure of any such attempt>

The main protection of civil liberties on digital communication networks is however encryption. The advances made in public key cryptography since the 1970s have made encryption easy to use for anyone even vaguely motivated by privacy concerns to encrypt their data securely <stats about how long it takes to break RSA>. The low usage of encryption can only really be attributed to laziness.

Conclusion
IT has utterly redefined the boundaries of civil liberties with regard to freedom of speech over the last decade. While it has enabled organisations to do data monitoring on an unprecedented scale it has also empowered individuals to protect their data for the forseeable future should they so wish. Unless some miracle method is developed for finding the prime factors of huge numbers all communication can be made provably secure. Governments banning encryption technology to allow easier monitoring is of course feasible, indeed exporting encryption from the US is already highly illegal, being classed in the same category as nuclear weapons. However other options are available. As the organisations have seas of data to analyse stenography, a collection of methods for hiding data within other data is a possibility. An example of this would be hiding ascii text within the pixel specifications of a jpeg image in such a way so as to make the data not only visually invisible, but also immune to statistical analysis of the image.

Assuming the NSA or other similiar organisations have no incredible mathematical formula for factoring or have managed to create huge quantum computers years before academia even breaks the 100 qubit limit then anyone with sufficient motivation can protect themselves from the technological might of even the US government. 

This calls into question the validity of the justifications given for such large scale monitoring. Assuming (and its a pretty safe assumption) that terrorists and other enemies of the state have sufficient motivation to encrypt their data then who are the powers that be monitoring? The answer is normal civilian data.<example of data being used for non-mil purposes> IT has created the ironic situation where everyone is not under the thumb of an omni-present technological big-brother, but only those least likely to actually deserve scrutiny. 
